I get a lot of questions about bone
density. This is because my first
invention which can be found at osteo
locations is a medical device that puts
axial this is the axis of a bone
compression. So end to end compression
on bone. This stimulates the bone to
deform slightly. When the bone deforms
if you ever look at the inside of a bone
or a picture of the inside of a bone u
it looks like a honeycomb. There's all
sorts of little walls. And as those
walls bend and become
distorted, they're stimulated to pull in
minerals and recalcify, building more
little walls in between the nuclei of
the cells, increasing the density of
bone. There's a lot of myths in this
space. Many people say all you need to
do is exercise. Well, here's the
problem. the minimum dose response for
the hip joint and that is the most
important place for bone density. We
track spinal bone density and hip bone
density typically in in the health
measurements of DEXA scans. Uh that's
the sort of standard of care. When
tracking those things, the hip matters
much more because hip fractures are
associated with mortality. So the
statistic is you have a 50% chance of
death within one year of a hip fracture
after the age of 50. 50% chance after
the age of 50. I know that sounds crazy.
Now how do these people die? They break
their hip. That doesn't sound like a
life-threatening thing. The problem is
they break their hip. They go to the
hospital. they can't recover because it
needs a lot of body resources to rebuild
that. And also some of the time the bone
shatters instead of a clean break. And a
lot a lot of that has to do with
bisphosphinate drugs. There's a whole
classification of drugs that are
supposed to protect you from fragility
fracture. But if you do have a fracture,
the fractures are real bad. Uh when this
happens, you can't heal because there's
too many pieces. The doctors can't screw
them all back in. Sometimes there's a
mesh that goes around the bone. Keep in
mind to do this surgery, they got to rip
all the muscle away from the bone to get
at it and to put everything back in
place. You really do not want a
fragility fracture. So, how do you build
bone density? Now, uh there are a number
of osteorong centers.
That's the ultimate because that's a
machine that uses robotic arms to put
you in exactly the right position so
that you're just short of blockout
120°ree angle. Same thing with the legs,
but it's easier for me to demonstrate
with my arm here. So, you're contracting
in a very small range of motion to try
and load these bones, the radius, the
ulna, the humorris, all the way through
the clavicle, the all the upper
extremities. That's one of the four
movements gives you incredible loading.
Now, if you don't have access to
this, there are a number of things you
can do. So, if you're deconditioned,
let's say you you couldn't just get up
and jog. You don't have the coordination
for that. You haven't been athletic in a
long time. What I want you to do is
focus on heel drops. So, what you do is
you stand on your toes and drop
down. And you're getting some level of
loading.
Now, every time I heel hits, my whole
body needs to rebalance itself. So, my
obliques are firing, my quadrus muscles
are firing, my abs are firing, my spinal
erectors are firing. All of these
muscles are firing to stabilize me. And
that's going to make me better at more
challenging ways of loading body. Like,
if I instead of just heel dropping, I
actually want to jump.
I tow strike when I land as we all are
supposed to. Now over time you get you
build your way to a plyometric jump. So
something more like
this. Now when you jump like that you
can actually get to the and this is the
important part minimum dose
response as in the minimum amount of
loading that's required to stimulate
growth in the hip joint. This is 4.2
multiples of body weight. So, for those
of you who are still thinking, "Oh,
yeah, I'm getting that in the gym or I'm
getting that with X3." No, you're not.
Uh, one of my really good buddies, Matt
Winning, uh, held the world record in
the squat for the super heavyweight
division. So, he's a 300lb guy and he
did a 12,200 lb
squat. That's four multiples. So, the
world record squat doesn't even hit the
minimum for bone density growth.
However, in high impact, as we see with
gymnastics research, you can get to
seven, eight, even 10 times your body
weight from impact. So, don't be afraid
of impact. You want to select the level
of impact that is appropriate for your
level of conditioning. So, like I said,
start with heel drops. If you have a
balance problem, you can grab a
chair. And if you want to do heel drops,
you can just, you know, like put put
your fingers on the front of a chair
and drop like that. Or even your
jumping, if you put a chair right in
front of you, you lose your balance, you
can always grab a hold of the chair.
So, please ask questions in the comment
section. I want to make sure that all
the way from athletic people who want
higher bone density because they want an
athletic
advantage
or deconditioned people who haven't
exercised in a long time, ask the
questions. I want to keep this video
series going on bone density so I can
help as much as I possibly can with
anyone who's compromised.